Welcome, Cosmo Girls, to this lecture.
In this lecture, we're going to learn about the infamous VI.
ED So VI pronounced us.
VI is a screen oriented text.
Ed Originally created for the Unix operating system.
This Ed is very popular because it comes preinstalled with all Unix and Linux distributions.
So if you learn this once you can edit change files in any Linux or Unix distribution.
However, VI ed could be a little painful to learn.
Fortunately, in all, newer Linux distributions such as Amazon, Linux, two, Red Hat, Enterprise
Linux Centaurus you can actually use your keyboard to do a lot of changes instead of going through commands,
and that's what we are going to learn in this lecture.
Most of the times the operating system you are going to use will be the newer operating systems.
All right.
So let's go to the terminal to create a file with VI editor.
You simply type VI and then name of the file.
Let's say I want to create a file named lan via txt press enter.
It will open up the file.
Now, one of the very important thing to remember is VI.
Ed has two models.
One is command mode and the other one is insertion mode in the command mode.
You cannot insert anything in the file by default.
Files in VI will open up in command mode.
So even if I'm typing something on my keyboard, nothing will be inserted.
To go into the incite mode to put something on the file you press the key I and you could see on the
lower left corner we have this word insert now to notify that we are in the insert mode.
Now, if I type something, they will be inserted into the file.
Just to give you a test of the older VI.
Let's say you want to write something on the second line.
You had to go back to the command mode and you can go back to the command mode by pressing the escape
key.
And you could see as soon as I pressed the escape key, the insert notation on the bottom left went
away, and now you press all key.
That creates a new line and it also gets you into insertion mode.
But fortunately in the New World Linux, you don't need to go back and forth with command mode and insert
mode.
Now you can press enter like any other keyboard editor and it will create a new line.
Similarly, before to do copy paste, you had to do a bunch of stuff, but now you can simply go to
another page.
Let's say I'm in the Jenkins page, I'm going to copy this using control c come back to the high editor
and then you can just press control V and that should work.
Now, one handy thing to remember is undoing any change.
So the undoing change command is you as an undo.
But remember this, these are all commands.
So to execute any command, you have to go back to the command mode.
So as you can see, we are currently in the insert mode.
Go back to the command mode.
You have to press the escape key again.
And then if you press the key, whatever you did last will be undo would be mindful of these two modes
because it's very easy to mess things up.
So let's say I'm in command mode and now I want to paste something.
It will pass by to mess something up.
Watch this.
So I'm in command mode.
I'm just going to press control.
V As you could see, I wanted the line to be in the first line.
It kind of pasted it, but then you could see it did not pass the whole thing.
So I'm going to delete this again and then let me press escape to go back to the command mode, take
my cursor to the first line.
Now let's go to the inside mode by pressing I and then I'm going to pass something.
As you could see now it passed properly.
Personally, I find it very handy to remember the undo command.
So let's say I go back to the command mode and then try to pass something.
It messed something up.
I see.
I'm in the insert mode.
I press escape.
Press you to undo.
Take my cursor up.
Press I go back to the insert mode and then insert stuff again.
You can use your keyboard arrow keys and delete keys with all the new Linux distributions.
For example, if you want to delete this, you can simply delete using the backspace or delete.
That's what I'm using.
But again, a lot of the older Linux distribution, it was not allowed.
So that was super painful when I was learning VI in my college days.
So now let's talk about how to save the files or not save the files again.
Remember, to save any file, you generally need to run a command.
So always go back to the command mode.
And to do that you press the escape key.
It went to the command mode.
If you want to save the file, but you want to keep the file open, you press colon and then w you could
see the commands on the bottom left press enter.
So now this line via the text file is saved, but it is still open.
If you want to save the file and quit again, press colon in the command mode, press w, q and then
press enter.
All right, now the file is saved, but we got out of the file.
You could see we got the command prompt back.
So let me create the screen.
To open up an existing file.
You simply run the same command y and then learn via txt press enter it opened up the file.
Now let's say you type something.
And let's say you did a lot of changes and you don't want to go back and undo everything so you can
quit the file without saving by pressing escape to go back to the command mode and then press colon.
Q And exclamation mark.
The press enter.
It did not save.
It just went out.
Phi Phi Phi text again.
You could see our changes are not saved and let's say you are in a file, you are just browsing it and
you want to get out, basically quit without doing anything again.
Press Escape To go back to command mode.
The command is colon.
Q Enter.
So note that let me go back to the file again.
Let's say I go back to the insert mode and then I put a line and you don't want to save this just typing
escape to go to command mode.
Colon Q is not going to work in a lot of Linux distributions if I press Q.
Now, it senses that you already changed something, so just putting colon Q is not going to work.
That is only going to work if you went into the file, you browse it and then you want to quit.
If you are added something, you have to run colon Q and exclamation mark to overwrite any changes you
did.
So basically press that.
And then if I go back again, the random line is not saved.
All right.
I'm going to give a cheat sheet attached to this lecture so you can refer to the commands.
But couple of takeaways.
People always mess up the command mode and insert mode.
Remember, if you copy paste stuff in command mode, things will get messy.
So always remember that you have to go to insert mode to press stuff and command mode to run the commands.
And by default VI always stays in command mode and it shows it on the bottom left.
Personally, I tried to use VI as less as possible because most of the time I would work in Cloud nine
or Visual Studio code.
So I'll just open up the files there and then do it in a regular editor and then save it and then use
the scripts.
But you might get some interview questions, especially if you are someone new in DevOps.
They might ask you What are the modes in VI?
How, what commands would you run to save the file, etc.?
Again, refer to the cheat sheet.
All right, folks, that's it for this one.
I'll see you guys and girls in the next one by.